.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999-2003 WU-FTPD Development Group. 
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1980, 1985, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994 
.\" The Regents of the University of California.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1993, 1994 Washington University in Saint Louis.  Portions Copyright 
.\" (c) 1996, 1998 Berkeley Software Design, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1998 Sendmail, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1983, 1995, 1996, 1997 Eric 
.\" P. Allman.  Portions Copyright (c) 1989 Massachusetts Institute of 
.\" Technology.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Stan Barber.  Portions 
.\" Copyright (C) 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 Free Software 
.\" Foundation, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Kent Landfield. 
.\"
.\" Use and distribution of this software and its source code are governed 
.\" by the terms and conditions of the WU-FTPD Software License ("LICENSE"). 
.\"
.\"	$Id: ftpd.8,v 1.17 2016/03/11 09:33:54 wmaton Exp $
.\"
.TH WU-FTPD 8 "Jul 19, 2011"
.UC 5
.SH NAME
WU-FTPD \- Internet File Transfer Protocol server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ftpd
[
.B \-d
] [
.B \-c
] [
.B \-v
] [
.B \-l
] [
.BR \-t
timeout
] [
.BR \-T
maxtimeout
] [
.BR \-4
] [
.BR \-a
] [
.BR \-A
] [
.BR \-C
] [
.BR \-G
] [
.BR \-h
] [
.BR \-H
] [
.BR \-i
] [
.BR \-I
] [
.BR \-K
] [
.BR \-L
] [
.BR \-o
] [
.BR \-p
ctrlport
] [
.BR \-P
dataport
] [
.BR \-q
] [
.BR \-Q
] [
.BR \-r
rootdir
] [
.BR \-R
] [
.BR \-s
] [
.BR \-S
] [
.BR \-u
umask
] [
.BR \-U
] [
.BR \-V
] [
.BR \-w
] [
.BR \-W
] [
.BR \-x
] [
.BR \-X
] [
.BR \-z
option
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I FTPD
is the Internet File Transfer Protocol
server process.  The server uses the TCP protocol
and listens at the port specified in the ``ftp''
service specification; see
.IR services (5).
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-4
When running in standalone operation mode, listen for
connections on an AF_INET type socket. When built with IPv6 support, the
default is to listen on an AF_INET6 type socket.
.TP
.B \-a
Use the
.IR ftpaccess (5)
configuration file.
.TP
.B \-A
Use of the
.IR ftpaccess (5)
configuration file is disabled. This is the default.
.TP
.B \-c
Specifying this option lists the compile-time options (and defaults) that
were used to build the WU-FTPD server.
.TP
.B \-C
If this option is specified when built with GSS-API support, non-anonymous users need
local credentials (for example, to authenticate to remote fileservers), and
so they should be prompted for a password unless they forwarded credentials as
part of authentication.
.TP
.B \-d \-v
Debugging information is written to the syslog.
.TP
.B \-G
If this option is specified when built with GSS-API support, the use of the GSS-API
authentication support is disabled.  By default, the server will accept
"AUTH GSS" and attempt to authenticate the client.
.TP
.B \-H
Enables the use of remote IP (RIP) files, required by the host-limit
directive to determine the number of current users from the same IP address
in each access class. By default, RIP files are not used. Only enable the use
of RIP files if you wish to impose limits on the number of connections per
remote IP address in a given class.
.TP
.B \-h
Prints a brief summary of
.IR WU-FTPD (8)
command-line options.
.TP
.B \-i
Files received by the
.IR WU-FTPD (8)
server will be logged to the
.IR xferlog (5).
The
.B \-i
option is overridden by the use of the
.IR ftpaccess (5)
file.
.TP
.B \-I
Disables the use of RFC931 (AUTH/ident) to attempt to determine the
username on the client.
.TP
.B \-K
If this option is specified when built with GSS-API support, users are required to
present GSS-API authentication credentials in order to login, standard
name/password login will not work.
.TP
.B \-l
Each ftp session is logged in the syslog.
.TP
.B \-L
Commands sent to the
.IR WU-FTPD (8)
server will be logged to the syslog.  The 
.B \-L
option is overridden by the use of the
.IR ftpaccess (5)
file.  If the 
.B \-L 
flag is used, command logging will be on by
default as soon as the ftp server is invoked.
This will cause the server to log all USER
commands, which if a user accidentally enters a
password for that command instead of the
username, will cause passwords to be logged via syslog.
.TP
.B \-o
Files transmitted by the
.IR WU-FTPD (8)
server will be logged to the 
.IR xferlog (5).  
The 
.B \-o
option is overridden by the use of the
.IR ftpaccess (5)
file.  If the
.B \-X
option is specified, the output created by the
.B \-i
and
.B \-o
options is not saved to the xferlog file but saved via syslog
so you can collect output from several hosts on one central loghost.
If the
.B \-x
option is specified, the output created by the
.B \-i
and
.B \-o
options is saved to the xferlog file and via syslog.
.TP
.B \-p \-P
options override the port numbers used by the daemon.  Normally, the daemon
determines the port numbers by looking in /etc/services for "ftp" and "ftp-data".
If there is no /etc/services entry for "ftp-data" and the
.B \-P
option is not specified, the daemon uses the port just prior to the control connection
port.
The
.B \-p
option is only available if running as a standalone daemon.
.TP
.B \-q \-Q
Deterines whether the daemon uses the PID files.  These files are required by the
limit directive to determine the number of current users in each access class.  Disabling
the use of the PID files disables user limits.  The default (
.B \-q
) is to use the PID files.  Specify
.B \-Q
when testing the server as a normal user when access permissions prevent the use of the PID files.
Large, busy sites which do not wish to impose limits on the number of concurrent users may also consider
disabling the PID files.
.TP
.B \-r
Instructs the daemon to chroot(2) to the specified rootdir immedeately upon loading.  This can
improve system security by limiting the files which may be damaged should a breakin occur through the
daemon.  Set is much like anonymous FTP, with additional files needed which vary from system to system.
.TP
.B \-R
Tells the daemon to not honour the REST command, possibly preventing "download managers" from
hogging your bandwidth.
.TP
.B \-s \-S
Place the daemon in standalone operation mode.  The
.B \-S
option runs the daemon in the background and is useful in startup scripts
during system initialization (ie., in rc.local).  The
.B \-s
option leaves the daemon in foreground and is useful when running from init
(ie., /etc/inittab).
.TP
.B \-t
The inactivity timeout period will be set to
.I timeout
seconds as opposed to the default value of 15 minutes.
A client may also request a different timeout period;
the maximum period allowed may be set to
.I timeout
seconds with the
.B \-T
option.
The default limit is 2 hours.
.TP
.B \-u
Set the default umask to
.I umask.
.TP
.B \-U
User logins are recorded in the utmp file. The
default is to not record every login and logout.
.TP
.B \-V
Causes the program to display copyright and version information, then
terminate.
.TP
.B \-W
User logins are not recorded in the wtmp file.  The
default (
.B \-w
) is to record every login and logout.
.TP
.B \-z
Used for the SSL/TLS configuration. See the next section for details.
.TP
.B \-\?
Lists the foregoing command-line options that can be passed to the daemon.
.PP
.SH TLS CONFIGURATION OPTIONS (-z parameter)
.PP
.B See the doc/HOWTO/ssl_and_tls_ftpd.HOWTO file for details on the usage of the options listed here.
.PP
.B \-z cert=file
or 
.B \-z rsacert=file
provides the file location of the X.509 certificate for the WU-FTPD server, in PEM format. 
.PP
.B \-z key=file
or 
.B \-z rsakey=file
provides the file location of the PEM encoded private key for the WU-FTPD server.
.PP
.B \-z dsacert=file
provides the file location of the DSA certificate for the WU-FTPD server.
.PP
.B \-z dsakey=file
provides the file location of the DSA private key for the WU-FTPD server.
.PP
.B \-z dhparam=file
provides the file location of the file containing Diffie-Hellman parameters.
.PP
.B \-z crlfile=file
provides the file location of the CRL file for the WU-FTPD server.
.PP
.B \-z crldir=dir
provides the directory location of the CRL directory for the WU-FTPD server.
.PP
.B \-z cipher=cipher_suites
provides the list of TLS cipher suites to use - see README.TLS for format and meaning.  Common values are ALL or ALL:!EXP
.PP
.B \-z randfile=file
provides the file location of the random data file for the WU-FTPD server.
.PP
.B \-z debugfile=file
provides the file location of the TLS debug file (if -z debug is specified and TLS_DEBUG or --enable-tls-debug were used at compile time).
.PP
.B \-z systemcertdir=dir
provides the location of the directory that contains the certificate mapping files for system-wide certificate mapping.  See README.TLS for more info.
.PP
.B \-z systemcertdir=dir
provides the location of the directory that contains the certificate mapping files for system-wide certificate mapping.  See README.TLS for more info.
.PP
.B \-z config=file
provides the location of the configuration file which can contain these -z options instead of passing them on the command line.
.PP
.B \-z authmode=OPTION
specifies the authentication mode of the TLS session.  OPTION is one of "server", "client_can" and "client_must".  The default value is "client_can".
.PP
.B \-z certpass=OPTION
specifies more authentication options for a TLS session.  OPTION is one of "certok" or "needpass".  The default value is "certok".  Determines the behavior for PASS if the session is client authenticated.
.PP
.B \-z password=PASSWORD
specifies the password to be used to decrypt the pem key file(s).
.PP
.B \-z CAfile=FILE
specifies the file containing the list of acceptable Client Certificate Issuers
.PP
.B \-z CApath=PATH
specifies the directory containing the certificates and hashes  of acceptable Client Certificate Issuers
.PP
.B \-z certsok
instructs the WU-FTPD server not to check the CA chain of client presented certificates.
.PP
.B \-z debug
makes the WU-FTPD server write debugging info to the file specified in debugfile
.PP
.B \-z tlsonly/protect_user
tells the WU-FTPD server to only accept USER commands on a secured control connection.
.PP
.B \-z tlsdata
tells the WU-FTPD server to only allow data conenctions when in the PROT P state.
.PP
.B \-z clientcert
tells the WU-FTPD server to only allow user authentication via client certificates.  (disables the PASS command).
.PP
.B \-z allow_auth_ssl (this option is not recommended)
allows the WU-FTPD server to operate with the old AUTH SSL logic.
.PP
.B \-z bad_auth_ssl_reply (this option is not recommended)
causes the WU-FTPD server to reply with the incorrect 334 reply to an AUTH command.  Only provided for users who are migrating the incorrectly implemented WU-FTPD 2.5 patch.
.PP
.B \-z allowccc (this option is not recommended)
lets the client drop protection on the control connection.  Use with caution.
.PP
.B \-z rsader
RSA certificates are in DER and not PEM.  Why - I don't know.
.PP
.B \-z logalldata
log all secured data connections - not just the first.
.PP
.B \-z notls
don't allow this server to do TLS.  Allows TLS compiled servers to not do TLS.
.PP
.SH FTP PROTOCOL COMMANDS
The ftp server currently supports the following ftp
requests; case is not distinguished.
.PP
.nf
.ta \w'Request        'u
\fBRequest	Description\fP
ABOR	abort previous command
ACCT	specify account (ignored)
ALLO	allocate storage (vacuously)
APPE	append to a file
CDUP	change to parent of current working directory
CWD	change working directory
DELE	delete a file
FEAT	return features supported by FTP server
HELP	give help information
LIST	give list files in a directory (``ls -lgA'')
MKD	make a directory
MDTM	show last modification time of file
MODE	specify data transfer \fImode\fP
MLSD	list directory contents
MLST	ask for data about the given object
NLST	give name list of files in directory 
NOOP	do nothing
OPTS	modify options list of FTP commands that support it.
PASS	specify password
PASV	prepare for server-to-server transfer
PORT	specify data connection port
PWD	print the current working directory
QUIT	terminate session
REST	restart incomplete transfer
RETR	retrieve a file
RMD	remove a directory
RNFR	specify rename-from file name
RNTO	specify rename-to file name
SBUF	set the TCP Window size.
SITE	non-standard commands (see next section)
SIZE	return size of file
STAT	return status of server
STOR	store a file
STOU	store a file with a unique name
STRU	specify data transfer \fIstructure\fP
SYST	show operating system type of server system
TYPE	specify data transfer \fItype\fP
USER	specify user name
XCUP	change to parent of current working directory (deprecated)
XCWD	change working directory (deprecated)
XMKD	make a directory (deprecated)
XPWD	print the current working directory (deprecated)
XRMD	remove a directory (deprecated)
.fi
.PP
The remaining ftp requests specified in Internet RFC 959 are
recognized, but not implemented.
.PP
The following non-standard or UNIX-specific commands are supported
by the SITE request.
.PP
.nf
.ta \w'Request        'u
\fBRequest	Description\fP
ALIAS        enquire about directory aliases listed in ftpaccess.
CDPATH       enquire about cdpaths defined in ftpaccess.
CHECKMETHOD  switch between checksum types, crc, md5, posix or rfc1321.
CHECKSUM     generate a checksum on the remote filename 
CHMOD	     change mode of a file. \fIE.g.\fP SITE CHMOD 755 filename
EXEC	     execute a program.  \fIE.g.\fP SITE EXEC program params
GPASS	     give special group access password. \fIE.g.\fP SITE GPASS bar
GROUP	     request special group access. \fIE.g.\fP SITE GROUP foo
GROUPS       request group membership info.
HELP	     give help information. \fIE.g.\fP SITE HELP
IDLE	     set idle-timer. \fIE.g.\fP SITE IDLE 60
INDEX        backward compatibility before the arrival of SITE EXEC
MINFO	     like SITE NEWER, but gives extra information
NEWER	     list files newer than a particular date
UMASK	     change umask. \fIE.g.\fP SITE UMASK 002
.fi
.PP
The SBUF, SITE commands BUFSIZE and BUFSIZEMEASURE are not documented in any
RFC, rather they are special extensions that allow TCP buffer sizes to be set
and measured, respectively.  These commands only work if the feature has been
enabled at compile time and with a client that will make use of them.  Also,
there's no guarantee that the requested TCP window size will be honored due
to system constraints defined as a maximum, for example.
.PP
The ftp server will abort an active file transfer only when the
ABOR command is preceded by a Telnet "Interrupt Process" (IP)
signal and a Telnet "Synch" signal in the command Telnet stream,
as described in Internet RFC 959.
If a STAT command is received during a data transfer, preceded by a Telnet IP
and Synch, transfer status will be returned.
.PP
.I WU-FTPD
interprets file names according to the ``globbing''
conventions used by
.IR csh (1).
This allows users to utilize the metacharacters ``*?[]{}~''.
.PP
.I WU-FTPD
authenticates users according to four rules. 
.IP 1)
The user name must be in the password data base,
.IR /etc/passwd ,
or whatever is appropriate for the operating system,
and the password must not be null.  In this case a password
must be provided by the client before any file operations
may be performed.
.IP 2)
The user name must not appear in the file
.IR /etc/ftpusers .
.IP 3)
The user must have a standard shell returned by 
.IR getusershell (3).
.IP 4)
If the user name is ``anonymous'' or ``ftp'', an
anonymous FTP account must be present in the password
file (user ``ftp'').  In this case the user is allowed
to log in by specifying any password (by convention this
is given as the client host's name).
.PP
In the last case, 
.I WU-FTPD
takes special measures to restrict the client's access privileges.
The server performs a 
.IR chroot (2)
command to the home directory of the ``ftp'' user.
In order that system security is not breached, it is recommended
that the ``ftp'' subtree be constructed with care;  the following
rules are recommended.
.IP ~ftp)
Make the home directory owned by super-user and unwritable by anyone.
.IP ~ftp/bin)
Make this directory owned by the super-user and unwritable by
anyone.  The program
.IR ls (1)
must be present to support the list command.  This
program should have mode 111.
.IP ~ftp/etc)
Make this directory owned by the super-user and unwritable by
anyone.  The files
.IR passwd (5)
and
.IR group (5)
must be present for the 
.I ls
command to be able to produce owner names rather than numbers. Depending
on the operating system, there may be other required files. Check your
manual page for the 
.IR getpwent (3)
library routine.
The password field in
.I passwd
is not used, and should not contain real encrypted passwords.
These files should be mode 444 and owned by the super-user.
Don't use the system's /etc/passwd file as the password file or
the system's /etc/group file as the group file in the ~ftp/etc directory.
.IP ~ftp/pub)
Create a subdirectory in ~ftp/pub
with the appropriate mode (777 or 733) if you want to allow normal
users to upload files.
.PP
.SH AUTHENTICATION MECHANISM ON BSD/OS SYSTEMS ONLY
The authentication mechanism used by WU-FTPD is determined by
the ``auth-ftp'' entry in the
.IR /etc/login.conf
file
(see
.IR login.conf (5))
that matches the users class.
If there is no ``auth-ftp'' entry for the class, the normal ``auth'' entry
will be used instead.
An alternate authentication mechanism may be specified by
appending a colon (``:'') followed by the authentication
style, i.e. ``joe:skey''.
.SH GENERAL FTP EXTENSIONS
.PP
There are some extensions to the FTP server such that if the user
specifies a filename (when using a RETRIEVE command) such that:
.PP
.nf
 True Filename  Specified Filename  Action
 -------------  ------------------  -----------------------------------
 <filename>.Z   <filename>          Decompress file before transmitting
 <filename>     <filename>.Z        Compress <filename> before 
                                            transmitting
 <filename>     <filename>.tar      Tar <filename> before transmitting
 <filename>     <filename>.tar.Z    Tar and compress <filename> before
                                            transmitting
.fi
.PP
Also, the FTP server will attempt to check for valid e-mail addresses and
chide the user if he doesn't pass the test.  For users whose FTP client
will hang on "long replies" (i.e. multiline responses), using a dash as
the first character of the password will disable the server's lreply()
function.
.PP
The FTP server can also log all file transmission and reception,
keeping the following information for each file transmission that takes
place.
.PP
.nf
Mon Dec  3 18:52:41 1990 1 wuarchive.wustl.edu 568881 /files.lst.Z a _ o a chris@wugate.wustl.edu ftp 0 *

  %.24s %d %s %d %s %c %s %c %c %s %s %d %s
    1   2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10 11 12 13

  1 current time in the form DDD MMM dd hh:mm:ss YYYY
  2 transfer time in seconds
  3 remote host name
  4 file size in bytes
  5 name of file
  6 transfer type (a>scii, b>inary)
  7 special action flags (concatenated as needed):
        C   file was compressed
        U   file was uncompressed
        T   file was tar'ed
        _   no action taken
  8 file was sent to user (o>utgoing) or received from 
    user (i>ncoming)
  9 accessed anonymously (r>eal, a>nonymous, g>uest) -- mostly for FTP
 10 local username or, if guest, ID string given 
    (anonymous FTP password)
 11 service name ('ftp', other)
 12 authentication method (bitmask)
        0   none
        1   RFC931 Authentication
 13 authenticated user id (if available, '*' otherwise)
.fi
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ftp(1) ,
.BR getusershell(3) ,
.BR syslogd(8) ,
.BR ftpaccess(5) ,
.BR xferlog(5) ,
.BR umask(2)
.SH BUGS
The anonymous account is inherently dangerous and should
avoided when possible.
.PP
The server must run as the super-user
to create sockets with privileged port numbers.  It maintains
an effective user id of the logged in user, reverting to
the super-user only when binding addresses to sockets.  The
possible security holes have been extensively
scrutinized, but are possibly incomplete.
.SH "COPYRIGHT NOTICE"
